[Music]
we've all seen movies about terrible
insects from outer space or stories of
abduction by little green men but the
study of life in the universe including
the possibility of extraterrestrial life
is also a serious scientific pursuit
astrobiology draws on diverse fields
such as physics biology astronomy and
geology study how life was formed on
earth how it could form elsewhere and
how we might detect it many ancient
religions described other worlds
inhabited by non-human beings but these
were more like mythical realms or
parallel universes than other planets
existing in the same physical world it
is only within the last century that
scientists been able to seriously
undertake the search for
extraterrestrial life we know at the
most basic level organisms on earth need
three things liquid water a source of
energy an organic carbon based material
we also know that the earth is just the
right distance from the Sun so as not to
be either frozen or molten so planets
within such a habitable range from their
own stars may be able to support life
but while we used to think that life
could only exist in such earth-like
environments one of the most amazing
discoveries of astrobiology has been
just how versatile life is we now know
that life can thrive in some of the most
extreme environments that be fatal for
most known organisms life is found
everywhere from black smoke or
hydrothermal vents and the dark depths
of Earth's oceans to bubbling hot sauce
that expands on the flanks of volcanoes
to high up in the atmosphere organisms
that live in these challenging
environments accord extremophiles and
they can survive at extremes of
temperature pressure and radiation as
well as salinity acidity and limited
availability of sunlight water or oxygen
what is most remarkable about these
extremophiles is they have found
thriving in environments that mimic
those on alien worlds one of the most
important these worlds is our red and
dusty neighbor Mars today
astrobiologists are exploring places
where life might once have existed on
Mars using NASA's Curiosity rover one of
these is Gale Crater and
impact crater created when a meteor hit
the surface of Mars nearly 3.8 billion
years ago evidence from orbit suggests
past traces of water which means the
crater might want some supported life
planets not the only places that
astrobiologists are looking at for
example Europa one of the moons of
Jupiter and Enceladus and Titan two of
Saturn's moons are all exciting
possibilities although these moons are
extremely cold and too were covered in
thick ice there is evidence of liquid
oceans beneath the shell could life be
floating around in these oceans or could
it be living around black smoke events
at their bottom Titan is particularly
promising as it has an atmosphere and
earth like lakes seas and rivers flowing
across a surface it is very cold however
too cold for liquid water so these
rivers may instead be flowing with
liquid hydrocarbons such as methane and
ething these are composed of hydrogen
and more importantly carbon which is the
basic building block of all life as we
know it
so could life be found in these Lakes
although instruments are being designed
to study these distant worlds it takes
many years to build them and even longer
to get them where they need to be in the
meantime astrobiologists work in our own
natural laboratory the earth to learn
about all the weird and wonderful forms
of life that can exist and to help us
one day answer one of humanity's oldest
questions are we alone
you